The following article is by Paul Krugman and has been copied from the web-site of the New York Times.

The Mutilated Economy

Five years and eleven months have now passed since the U.S. economy entered recession. Officially,
that recession ended in the middle of 2009, but nobody would argue that we've had anything like a
full recovery. Official unemployment remains high, and it would be much higher if so many people
hadn't dropped out of the labor force. Long-term unemployment - the number of people who have been
out of work for six months or more - is four times what it was before the recession.
These dry numbers translate into millions of human tragedies - homes lost, careers destroyed, young
people who can't get their lives started. And many people have pleaded all along for policies that
put job creation front and center. Their pleas have, however, been drowned out by the voices of
conventional prudence. We can't spend more money on jobs, say these voices, because that would mean
more debt. We can't even hire unemployed workers and put idle savings to work building roads,
tunnels, schools. Never mind the short run, we have to think about the future!

The bitter irony, then, is that it turns out that by failing to address unemployment, we have, in
fact, been sacrificing the future, too. What passes these days for sound policy is in fact a form of
economic self-mutilation, which will cripple America for many years to come. Or so say researchers
from the Federal Reserve, and I'm sorry to say that I believe them.

I'm actually writing this from the big research conference held each year by the International
Monetary Fund. The theme of this year's shindig is the causes and consequences of economic crises,
and the presentations range in subject from the good (Latin America's surprising stability in recent
years) to the bad (the ongoing crisis in Europe). It's pretty clear, however, that the blockbuster
paper of the conference will be one that focuses on the truly ugly: the evidence that by tolerating
high unemployment we have inflicted huge damage on our long-run prospects.

How so? According to the paper (with the unassuming title "Aggregate Supply in the United States:
Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy"), our seemingly endless
slump has done long-term damage through multiple channels. The long-term unemployed eventually come
to be seen as unemployable; business investment lags thanks to weak sales; new businesses don't get
started; and existing businesses skimp on research and development.

What's more, the authors - one of whom is the Federal Reserve Board's director of research and
statistics, so we're not talking about obscure academics - put a number to these effects, and it's
terrifying. They suggest that economic weakness has already reduced America's economic potential by
around 7 percent, which means that it makes us poorer to the tune of more than $1 trillion a
year. And we're not talking about just one year's losses, we're talking about long-term damage: $1
trillion a year for multiple years.

That estimate is the end product of some complex data-crunching, and you can quibble with the
details. Hey, maybe we're only losing $800 billion a year. But the evidence is overwhelming that by
failing to respond effectively to mass unemployment - by not even making unemployment a major policy
priority - we've done ourselves immense long-term damage.

And it is, as I said, a bitter irony, because one main reason we've done so little about
unemployment is the preaching of deficit scolds, who have wrapped themselves in the mantle of
long-run responsibility - which they have managed to get identified in the public mind almost
entirely with holding down government debt.

This never made sense even in its own terms. As some of us have tried to explain, debt, while it can
pose problems, doesn't make the nation poorer, because it's money we owe to ourselves. Anyone who
talks about how we're borrowing from our children just hasn't done the math.

True, debt can indirectly make us poorer if deficits drive up interest rates and thereby discourage
productive investment. But that hasn't been happening. Instead, investment is low because of the
economy's weakness. And one of the main things keeping the economy weak is the depressing effect of
cutbacks in public spending - especially, by the way, cuts in public investment - all justified in
the name of protecting the future from the wildly exaggerated threat of excessive debt.

Is there any chance of reversing this damage? The Fed researchers are pessimistic, and, once again,
I fear that they're probably right. America will probably spend decades paying for the mistaken
priorities of the past few years.

It's really a terrible story: a tale of self-inflicted harm, made all the worse because it was done
in the name of responsibility. And the damage continues as we speak.
